# Salary-Bracket-Classifier

**Abstract:**
Since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, how have different data-related full-time U.S. jobs are structured salary-wise on the tier of salary based on remote-ratio, company size, position level, and other predictors is what I hope to find out. Essentially, I am figuring out which data jobs are classified to which salary tiers (below 100,000 U.S. dollars and greater than or equal to 100,000 U.S. dollars) to find their economic importance in the U.S. since the pandemic. This in terms of value on the job market as well as evaluate how company size, remote ratio, and skill level affect data job salary. I hope to better understand the growing demand for data jobs as students are wary of choosing such a field since they believe it is not financially secure. This is a question specific to the post-pandemic world that I am going to investigate as a classification problem. This will allow me to interpret data job trends and how the factors mentioned above affect potential salary and growth post-pandemic. I will use the specific data called the Economics of Data Careers on Kaggle by Jonathan Bown (https://www.kaggle.com/code/jonbown/economics-of-data-careers/data). I will refine it down to only including full-time jobs from the United States of America. The response variable will be the salary tier of either less than 100,000 (0) or greater than or equal to 100,000 (1). This is because students usually categorize a high salary by being six digits or more. For the purpose of this research paper, I will use the breakdown from the U.S. News as a reference. I will consider the lower tier as incomes 0 – 99, 000 U.S. dollars. I will consider the higher tier as 100,000 – infinity U.S. dollars. The nine predictors will be the work year (2020, 2021, 2022), experience level (EN, MI, SE, EX as dummy variables), remote ratio (0, 50, 100), company size (small, medium, large as dummy variables). The sample size is 328. I will conclude what the best model is out of a Logistic Regression Model, a K-NN model, and a Decision Tree Classifier model.

**Introduction:**
My research question is centered on how valuable full-time data are to companies since the pandemic in terms of salary depending on company size, remote ratio, and experience level. This will help me better understand the need for data-related skills for different companies and positions since the pandemic, where lot of data was needed to be processed. People should care if they are skeptical about whether a data job does not pay well or is not rising in value. People are also skeptical if remote ratio affects salary. In our research, we considered salary of 100,000 and above as high. This will hopefully instill more confidence in those wary of considering a data-related job because of job demand and salary. Machine learning is helpful in researching this question because I want to predict how remote ratio and company size can affect salary, which is why the data from 2020-2022 is useful. 

**Review of Literature:**
There has been another machine learning research paper called “Salary Prediction in Data Science Field Using Specialized Skills and Job Benefits” that aims to predict data science field salaries using specialized skills and job benefits as factors. They used random forests in order to have more stable and accurate prediction through the combination of multiple classifiers. Their focus also centered around data during and after the pandemic, which they call an industry revolution for how it changed and optimized jobs throughout the world to adapt to changing times. They claim there is a shortage of data science professionals and that through salary prediction for specifically data-related jobs they can allow students understand that those skills are valuable. The research paper essentially concluded that the best and most accurate classifying of salary actually depends on the type of data. They did not really interpret the data as they were more focused on finding the best model and deciding further testing is necessary.

Raheem, Mafas. Salary Prediction in Data Science Field Using Specialized Skills and ... July 2022, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/362280362_Salary_Prediction_in_Data_Science_Field_Using_Specialized_Skills_and_Job_Benefits_-A_Literature_Review. 

The news source has an article called “The Evolution of Data Science and AI at The New York Times” to highlight the increasing demand and necessity of data science jobs. They delve into how  New York Times has shifted to use artificial intelligence and data science in both the marketing and other business departments. This integration has only increased as businesses adapt to the availability of user data. They hold greater importance for data scientists because they want to know what data should be used to make marketing and business decisions. This includes analyzing risk and variability. The article basically argues that there is greater demand for data science skills in modern times because of how influential it can be in making business and marketing decisions. They also believe data science jobs are in demand and are necessary for businesses in the future because of the value they provide. 

Schmelzer, Ron. “The Evolution of Data Science and AI at the New York Times.” Forbes, Forbes Magazine, 21 Apr. 2022, https://www.forbes.com/sites/cognitiveworld/2021/10/09/creating-curating-and-optimizing-with-data-science-and-machine-learning-at-the-new-york-times/?sh=5e069be52020. 
